.\" Manpage for user(1).
.TH USER 1 "May 2026" "scripts" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
user \- system-user manager + frontend for per-user sub-services

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B user
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B user
.I user
.I sub-service
.I verb
.RI [ args ...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B user
manages system users and acts as a
.B frontend
for per-user sub-services. The frontend pattern
(per FEAT-148):

.PP
.B user <sub-service> <verb>
runs as the current user.
.br
.B user <user> <sub-service> <verb>
runs as
.I <user>
via
.BR sudo (1).

Sub-services live as plugins under
.IR libexec/user/<sub-service>/ .

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS System-level (existing)
.TP
.B help / version
.TP
.B list
List known system users.
.TP
.BI "create " user
Create
.I user
with the canonical home (`/var/lib/<user>` on Linux,
`/srv` for the special `srv` user, `/obj` for `obj`).
.TP
.BI "delete " user
Delete the user and home.
.TP
.BI "add " user " " group
Add the user to a group.
.TP
.BI <user> " exec"
Read a script from stdin and run as
.IR <user> .

.SS Sub-services
.TP
.B git
The canned git-hosting account setup
(libexec/user/git, FEAT-167 already done).
.TP
.B srv
The canned service-hosting account setup
(libexec/user/srv).
.TP
.B mails
Mail filtering integration (FEAT-149 — relocates
.BR bin/mailfilter ;
pending implementation).
.TP
.B api
Provider API integration (FEAT-150 — relocates
.BR bin/api ;
pending implementation).
.TP
.B shell
Dotfiles + shell startup.d as a curated installer
(FEAT-184; pending).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SELF_DEBUG
Enable shell tracing.
.TP
.B SELF_QUIET
Suppress informational output.

.SH FILES
.TP
.IR /var/lib/<user>/
The canonical Linux home directory.
.TP
.I libexec/user/<sub-service>/
Per-sub-service plugin (git, srv, mails, api, shell).

.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success; non-zero on failure.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR account (1),
.BR sudo (1),
.BR adduser (8).

.SH BUGS
Report at
.UR https://github.com/nostra124/scripts/issues
.UE .
